ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome
to Huberman Lab Essentials, where we revisit past
episodes for the most potent and actionable
science-based tools for mental health, physical
health, and performance. I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology
and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from
my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part
of my desire and effort to bring you
zero-cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public. We just closed out the
episodes on hormones. Now we are going
to talk about how to optimize physical
performance and skill learning. There are so many variables
to physical performance. And we can manage physical
performance and skill learning from a
variety of contexts. I made just a short list
of some of the things that come to mind
that can powerfully impact physical performance
and skill learning. Some of them are what I
would consider foundational. They allow you to show up
with your current ability. And if you were
to disrupt those, you would perform less well. So things like getting
a good night's sleep. Things like being
properly hydrated. Things like being
well nourished. There are supplements. There are drugs. There are different
ways to breathe. There are so many tools related
to mindset, visualization. It's just a vast space,
but it's not infinite. And there are a few
things in the list of things that can
impact and even optimize physical performance
and skill learning, that have an outsized effect
that any of you can use. So today, we are
going to focus on what I believe to be one of
the most powerful tools to improve physical
performance and skill learning, and recovery. We'll talk about why
that's important. And that's temperature. Believe it or not, temperature
is the most powerful variable for improving physical
performance and for recovery. There are two aspects to
temperature, of course. There's heat and there's cold. We are mainly going to focus on
cold as a way to buffer heat. We're going to talk about
cold from the standpoint of thermal physiology. This is a literature that's rich
in scientific information that goes back very deep into
the last century, where physiologists and
neuroscientists figured out that there are different
compartments in your body that heat and cool
you differently. And that you can
leverage those in order to double or even
triple, or quadruple your work output, both strength,
repetitions, and endurance. So this is not weak
sources, they say. This is the stuff
that can really shift the needle quite a bit. And it's not just about
performing well once. It's about being able to
perform well and recover from that performance so that
you do even better when you're not incorporating these tools
on days where, for instance, you can't access cold or an
ice pack or an ice bath, or things of that sort. Let's start by talking
about temperature. How does temperature impact the
body and its ability to perform, including learn new skills? So everyone probably remembers
or has at least heard of the word homeostasis, right? That the body wants to
remain in a particular range of temperatures, that it doesn't
like to be too hot or too cold. Heating up too much
is just plain bad. It's not just bad for
physical performance. It's bad for all tissue health. Cells stop functioning. They stop being able
to generate energy. They stop being able
to digest things. You stop being able to think. And eventually, those cells
start dying off entirely. Now, you don't want to
become hypothermic either. You can die from
hypothermia, just like you can die from hyperthermia. However, that you
have a lot more range to be cold than
you do to be too warm. OK? And in general, the idea is
to keep the body and brain in a particular range. But any time we do anything,
our body temperature can shift. So for instance, if you were
to stand next to a campfire or you were outside
on a hot day, various things would happen
to dump heat from your body. Now, what are those things? Well, there are a
huge category of them. But the simplest way to
think about this process is that when we get cold,
we tend to vasoconstrict. Our blood vessels
tend to constrict, and we tend to push energy
toward the core of our body to preserve our core organs. So our periphery, our
hands and our feet and our toes and our
legs become colder. And our core, therefore, can
maintain blood to that area, and we are insulating our core. Conversely, when we heat up,
our blood vessels vasodilate. They expand a bit and more
blood flows to our periphery and more blood can move
throughout the body generally. And we will perspire. We will sweat. Water will actually get pulled
out of the blood to some extent, moved up through
sweat glands, and will be brought to the skin surface
so that it can be dumped. We are dumping heat. So it's very
important that if you want to understand how you
can leverage temperature for physical
performance, you have to understand that you
have vasoconstriction to conserve heat,
vasodilation to dump heat. That you have,
sweating to dump heat, and you have
conservation of fluids in order to preserve heat. That's the most
important thing in terms of understanding the mechanisms
of maintaining and dumping heat. And now the most important
thing to understand is that if you get too hot, your
ability to contract your muscles stops. OK? I'm going to repeat this
because it's vitally important. ATP is involved in the
process of generating muscle contractions. The range of temperatures
within which ATP can function and muscles can
contract is very narrow. Somewhere around 39 or 40
degrees Celsius, it drops off and you will not be able to
generate more contractions. That's pretty hot,
but that temperature can be generated
locally really fast. Put simply, if you get too
hot, you stop exercising. You may not even realize it, but
your will to exercise further, your ability to push
harder is entirely dependent on the heat of
the muscle, both locally and your whole system. If you can keep
temperature in range, however, in a proper range, you
will be able to do more work. You will be able to
create greater output. You'll be able to lift more
weight, more sets, more reps. And you'll be able
to run further. Now, there are
data that I'm going to talk about in a little bit
that are absolutely striking, that underscore that statement. They are data from my
colleague Craig Heller's Lab in the Department
of Biology at Stanford. Many, if not all,
of the NFL teams are now using this technology,
as well as military uses it. And not just for
sports performance, but also firefighters,
construction workers, other professions where
elevated heat becomes a barrier to performance. And you can leverage this to
really improve your workouts. So how do you dump heat in
order to perform longer safely? Well, in order to
understand that, you have to understand that the
body has three main compartments for regulating temperature. We don't just have a
center and a periphery. We have three main compartments. And there's one
compartment in particular that all of you or most all of
you, I have to assume, have. And if you can understand
how that works, you can do tremendous
things for your performance and for your recovery. One is your core. We already talked about that. Your core organs, your heart,
your lungs, your pancreas, your liver. The core of your body. The other is your
periphery, which are obviously your
arms and your legs and your feet and your hands. But then there's
a third component, which is there are three
locations on your body that are far better at
passing heat out of the body and bringing cool
into the body, such that you can heat up or cool
your body everywhere very quickly. Those three areas are your
face, the palms of your hands, and the bottoms of your feet. Now the skin on your hands and
on the bottoms of your feet, and to some extent on your
face are called glaborous skin. That's G-L-A-B-O-R-O-U-S.
Glaborous skin. And what's special
about those areas of your body and
the glaborous skin is that the arrangement of
vasculature, of blood vessels, capillaries, and arteries
that serve those regions is very different than it
is elsewhere in your body. In these three regions
of your hands, your face, and the bottoms of your feet,
we have what are called AVAs. AVAs are a very special
pattern of vasculature. AVAs are arteriovenous
anastomoses. A-R-T-E-R-I-O, arterio. Venous, V-E-N-O-U-S.
Arteriovenous anastomoses, A-N-A-S-T-O-M-O-S-E-S.
Arteriovenous anastomoses. You want to know about
arteriovenous anastomoses. Trust me. AVAs are direct connections
between the small arteries and the small veins. They bypass the
capillaries to some extent. They are little short
vessel segments. They have a big,
large inner diameter. And they have this very
thick, muscular wall. And they get input from what
are called adrenergic neurons. They get input from
neurons that release norepinephrine and
epinephrine, which allows them to contract or dilate. Now, there are some
rules of physics that talk about how the radius
of a pipe, and small changes in the radius of a pipe leads
to massive increases in the rate and amount of stuff that
can flow through that pipe. It's a rule of physics
that says, essentially that the radius is proportional
to the amount of stuff that can flow through something
to the fourth power. What you need to
know, even if you don't want to know any of
the underlying physics, is that these AVAs allow more
heat to leave the body more quickly, and more cool to
enter the body more quickly than other venous,
arterial, capillary beds throughout the body. In other words, you can heat
up best at the face, the palms, and the bottoms of
the feet, and you can cool down best at
the face, the palms, and the bottoms of
the feet than you can anywhere else on your body. These three compartments of your
body, palms, bottoms of feet, and face are your
best leverage points for manipulating temperature
to vastly improve physical performance. So what Craig and his
colleagues did really illustrates perfectly what these
body surfaces can do and why. They were studying overheating
in athletes and in military and in construction workers,
and trying to prevent it. What they essentially found was
that cooling the palms, palmar cooling, allowed
people, athletes, and recreational athletes to
run much further, to lift more weight, and to do more sets
and reps to a absolutely staggering degree. Let's talk for a
second a bit more about why we stop, why we shut
off effort when we get too hot. When muscle heats up, enzymes
start getting disrupted, and ATP and muscles
can't work so well and those muscles
can't contract. The enzyme that's
involved here is something called pyruvate kinase. And pyruvate kinase
is essentially a rate-limiting step. It's a critical step that you
can't bypass if you want muscles to contract. And it's very
temperature-sensitive. Therefore, if you can
keep temperature lower, you can do more
work per unit time. You can do more pull-ups.
But they essentially did is they brought someone
into their laboratory who could do 10 pull-ups
on the first set, and they were able to get 10,
rest two or three minutes. Get another 10, rest
two or three minutes. And if you've ever
tried this, what you find is that you start
dropping to, eight, seven, six, et cetera now the person
might not necessarily feel like they're overheating,
but the muscle is heating up. Then with their
knowledge that these AVAs, that these
portals in the palms are a great way to
both heat the body, but also to dump heat from
the body, they used a device. And I'll talk about
what you can do at home, but a device where
they had people hold on to what was
essentially a cold tube. Now this is crucial. The tube can't be so cold that
it causes vasoconstriction, because then the cold won't
pass from the tube to the hand and to the core. But if it's the
right temperature, it's neither too
hot nor too cold, that cool from the
cold tube passes into the hand, these
so-called palmar regions, and then cools the core. And in theory, by
lowering body temperature, would allow the person or
the athlete to do more work. And indeed, that's
what they saw. The actual data,
the specific data showed that subjects
could do, at least the subjects they worked
with, on their first day, with no cooling, about 100
pull-ups across the time frame that they had. Then they came back
and did the cooling. They did it the
very next day, which if you've ever trained a muscle,
the very next day, typically you wouldn't do as
well in its training if it took any damage from
the previous sessions. Or you at least do as
well, but you probably wouldn't do what
they then observed, which was they started
cooling after every other set. The person would just
hold the cold tube, cool down the body
after every other set. Rest, everything else
was kept the same. And they found that they
went to 180 pull-ups, which is incredible. It's a near doubling. Now you may be asking,
what about endurance? With endurance, similar
increases have been shown. And the way that they
would do those tests are a little bit different. And they also point to a
really important mechanism of why we stop doing work at
all when we perceive that we are putting in too much effort. So it gets right to the
heart of the relationship between temperature and
muscles and your willpower. Those are directly related. Your body heat
and your willpower are linked in a
physiological way. OK, so let's talk about
willpower and heat, and how heat shuts you down. In other words, if you are
cool, if your body temperature is in a particular range,
not only can you go further, but you will go
further if you want to. Said differently. If you heat up too much, you
will stop or you will die. But there is a reflex that
relates the body to the brain, and the brain to the
body that shuts off our effort when we get too hot. So what Craig and
his colleagues, and now others have done, is
to do a test in the laboratory where rather than ask
people to run outside until they absolutely
don't want to run anymore, you put them on a treadmill
and you set the speed. So they have to keep
up with the treadmill. And at some point, they quit. And you take groups and you do
those in different temperature environments. So some people are running
in a nice chilly laboratory. They get their heart rate up. So they get into a steady
state cadence or rhythm, and their heart is beating at
more or less a steady state. People will continue
at that temperature and at that heart rate,
unless you start turning up the temperature in the room. And at some point,
they will stop, and they'll stop
much earlier when it gets hot because of
something called cardiac drift. OK, so let's say
I'm running and I'm running at a steady
cadence on this treadmill, and my heart rate is
85 beats per minute or 100 beats per minute. It doesn't matter. Let's say 100, just
for sake of example. Well, just making
the room hotter is going to increase my
heart rate further, even though I'm at the same output. And the brain does
a computation. It somehow figures out that
there's a heat component that's increasing heart
rate, and there's an effort component from running
that's driving heart rate. And if the heat component
and the heart rate output from the effort get to
hit a certain threshold, I stop. Increasing temperature
increases the rate of quitting, in
part, not entirely, but in part because of this
thing called cardiac drift. Heat increases heart rate. Effort increases heart rate. At a steady effort, you'll
have a steady heart rate. If you increase the
heat in the environment that you're engaging in
that steady heart rate, your heart rate will now
go up due to cardiac drift, and you will quit. OK? So Heller and colleagues
have done experiments where they do palmar cooling
under these environments. And that's wonderful
because not only does it enable people to go further
and faster for much longer. That's been shown statistically
significant every time, but it also protects the brain
and body against hyperthermia, overheating, coma, nerve injury,
nerve death, and actual death. OK. So you can see why this
is such a valuable tool. So how can you start
to incorporate this? Well, first of all,
I always get asked, how cold should the water be? Should it be ice water? Should it be very cold water? The answer is no. If you want to experience some
of this effect without a device, one thing you could do would
be, for instance, to do-- I don't know, I'll use the gym
or the treadmill as an example. You could do your maximum
number of pull-ups, stop. And then you could
actually put your hands into or on the surface of a sink
that is presumably stuffed up with cool water. So not ice water. Not freezing cold,
but cool water. Slightly cooler than
body temperature before you started training
would be a good place to start. You do that for
10 to 30 seconds. Then you could go back
and do your next set. You would repeat the cooling. You would want to extend the
amount of cooling somewhat. So you might want to do that
for 30 seconds to a minute. This is not going to be perfect. You're going to have
to play with how cold to make it in order to
get the optimal effect. But you ought to see
an effect nonetheless. The same is true if you're
running and you're fatiguing. Obviously, you don't want
to become hyperthermic. Cooling the hands or the
bottoms of your feet, or the face would
be the ideal way to dump heat in order to be
able to generate more output. Now, the face is something that
we haven't talked a lot about. Everything I've told
you up until now also says that if
you are somebody who tends to get cold when you
are outside, say in the winter or even in the fall you tend
to run cold, warming your face is going to be the most
important thing that you can do. Now you understand the
principle and the locations at which to deliver
heat and cold. So let's say that
you are out for a run and you want to incorporate
this cooling mechanism. I talked to Craig about this. I said, what would be the
kind of poor person's approach to this? And he said, well, you could
take a frozen juice can, if you have one of those,
or a very cold can of soda, and you would want to pass it
back and forth between your two hands. The reason the passing back
and forth is really important is because you
again, you don't want it to be so cold
that you constrict those venous portals that will
allow cold to go into the body. Now, there are certainly people
that are working on bike handles and that can actually
cool the hands. Here's what you
don't want to do. You don't want to cool the core
if you want to cool the body. Right? If it's a very hot day
and you're going to train, getting into an ice bath first,
sure, it will cool you down, but that's not going to
be as effective as cooling the palms, the bottoms of
the feet, and the face. The one that I've tried, because
in anticipation of this episode, was the dips, where then
I would cool my hands. I actually decided to cool
the bottoms of my feet as well, because
it just feels good and it's particularly
hot out lately. So no shoes or socks on. Put my feet into-- the bottoms of my
feet, just kind of hovering about
a centimeter or two below the surface
of a bucket of water that was just
slightly-- it felt cool. Slightly cooler than
body temperature or so. It just basically what
came out of the spigot after I let it run
for a little bit. And indeed, I saw a 60%
increase in the number of dips I can do in a single session. So it's actually a quite
significant effect. And you don't have to be
perfectly precise in order to do it. So up until now,
we've been talking about how to use
cold during a workout in order to improve performance. Now I want to talk about
the use of temperature, in particular cold,
to improve the speed and the depth of recovery. Recovery is obviously
vital, right? During a weight training session
or during an endurance session, that's just the stimulus for
getting better the next time. And if you don't recover, you
not only won't get better, but you'll get worse. There's a lot of interest
in the use of cold in order to improve
recovery in the short term. We see this, and probably
the best example of this would be fighters in combat
sports between rounds, or athletes in between
quarters or half time. That's one form of recovery. The ability to go
back into the sport very soon on an
order of minutes, anywhere from one minute in
between rounds in typical combat sports, or several minutes
at a half time, et cetera. And then, of course,
there's recovery that occurs from session to session. So outside of the game or the
match or the exercise session. And many people are now relying
on things like cryotherapy, which requires a lot
of expensive equipment, big liquid
nitrogen-driven machine. Those aren't so
common for most people or accessible for most people. But a lot of people are
using cold baths or ice baths or cold showers. And again, that's not
going to optimize recovery. In fact, it's going to have
an additional effect that is going to potentially
block the training stimulus. When you get into
an ice bath, you are indeed blocking some of the
inflammation that occurs because of the training session. But in doing so, you
also are blocking pathways such as mTOR,
mammalian target of rapamycin, which are involved in the
adaptation for a muscle to become stronger or bigger. Put simply, covering
the body in cold or immersing the body in
cold after training can short circuit or prevent the
hypertrophy or muscle growth response. It has other effects
that can be positive. Right? It can induce
thermogenesis, et cetera. It can reduce inflammation. But it can prevent some of the
positive effects of exercise. Now, it hasn't been examined
so much for endurance work, but let's say you come back
from around of endurance work or a run or a bike or a swim,
getting into a cool bath or cooling the palms, the
bottoms of the feet or the face, in my opinion, based
on the science, would be better than completely
immersing the body in the ice bath. If you can cool the body back to
its resting temperature for a-- and by resting temperature,
I mean within the range that you would see at
any time of waking day, but not in exercise. If you can do that,
the sooner you can do that after a workout,
the sooner that the muscle will recover, that the
tendons will recover, and that the person,
you, can get back into more endurance training,
more weight training, et cetera. So cold actually can be a very
powerful tool for recovery. But to maximize return to
baseline levels of temperature, just simply cooling
the entire body by jumping into an ice
bath or a cold shower is not the best way to go. You really want to rely on
one of these three glaborous skin portals of the palms,
the bottoms of the feet, or the face. One of the more
commonly used compounds that's sold over the counter are
non-steroid anti-inflammatories. So things like Tylenol and
Advil, and other trade names. And naproxen sodium
things of that sort. Almost all of those drop body
temperature to some extent. And that's why it's often
recommended that people take them when they have a fever. Now, a number of athletes,
especially endurance athletes, will rely on these non-steroid
anti-inflammatory drugs specifically to keep
body temperature lower during long bouts of exertion. This is a little bit of
a pharmacologic version of dumping heat. Instead of using palmar cooling
or face ice pack cooling, they're relying on pharmacology
to drop their core body temperature. That has certain
obvious advantages. Lower temperature allows
you to go further, harder with more intensity. However, they do have
effects on the liver. And they can also have
effects on the kidneys and during long
bouts of exercise, or even short bouts of exercise. Water balance and
salt balance are also going to be vital
to maintain in order to perform well, generate
the best muscle contraction, stay mentally alert,
and also to stay alive. You probably want to think
carefully about whether or not you want to use non-steroid
anti-inflammatories before any training session,
just for the performance augmentation effect, unless
you're working carefully with a coach. I personally am more a fan
of cooling of the palms, cooling of the
bottoms of my feet by placing them into a bucket or
into a cool bath after training. Or cooling the face
after training, or sometimes even
during training. It just seems like
there's more of a margin to play with the variables
to heat up the water or cool it down a
little bit, to include one palm or the other palm. There's just all sorts
of good parameter space, as we call it in science, that
you can play with and work with to find what works for you. Whereas when you pop a pill,
sure, you can adjust the dose and you can adjust it next
time, but once it's in you, it's in you. And there's going to
be some period of time before you can modulate it. So it doesn't give you
a lot of opportunity to play scientist, which
is what I like to do. Because what I'm
always trying to do is trying to dial in the
best protocols possible based on the mechanisms and data. And if you can do
that moment to moment, that places you in
a position of power. Once again, we've covered
a lot of material. By now, after
seeing this episode or listening to
this episode, you should understand a lot about
how your body heats and cools itself, and the value of that
for physical performance. I hope you'll also
appreciate that you have tools at your
disposal to vastly improve your physical performance. I've given you specific
protocols and some direction, but I've also left
it slightly vague because, as I mentioned
earlier, I don't know all the environmental conditions. I don't know how hot
your yoga studio is or how cool your
gym happens to be, or your body temperature
or time of day. Remember, your temperature will
vary according to time of day. Going forward, we're
going to talk more about temperature and other ways
to improve physical performance and skill learning. We're going to talk
about specific ways to accelerate fat loss,
to improve muscle growth, to improve suppleness
and flexibility. These approaches and
mechanisms are anchored deeply in neuroscience and physiology,
and the relationship between our peripheral
organs, which include our skin, and our brain,
and all the organs in between. And last but not least,
I want to thank you for your time and attention. I realize this is a
lot of information. I hope you'll find some of it to
be actionable and useful for you and for people that you know. And as always, thank you for
your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]